once around Kuwar.
So discovered at the Palomar Observatory
in 2002. This is minor planet number
50,000. Uh and that wasn't luck. It was
deliberately chosen because it was
thought to be a very large object. Um
track back pre-reovery images show it
all the way back to 1954.
And again, that gives us nearly 50 years
worth of orbital track. And so we can
pin this one down quite nicely. You can
see it moving with the obviously with
the arrow pointing at it there. But I
think it's quite clear that it's a
moving object in that little animation.
The name Qua comes from the mythological
uh figures of the Native American Tongva
tribe in Southern California near Los
Angeles. And it's the name for the
creation force of the universe. Now
there's some dis disagreement about how
to pronounce this. Uh
qua uh all sorts of names and uh well
it's just difficult isn't it? But here's
its orbit.
It's going around the solar system in a
nearly circular path well beyond
Neptune. Its orbit intersects with that
of Eris, but it's well outside the orbit
of Pluto in what's called the classical
Kiper belt. So, the orbit takes 289
years. That's about 30 years longer than
Pluto and goes in the region 42 to 45
astronomical units. Um that's five light
hours for the sun to get a photon from
uh its surface all the way out to qua.
Must be very dim from that distance. And
it's tilted at only 8° to that of the
solar system. Pluto's tilted at about
13° I believe. So this is relatively
flat and really a sort of more or less
planetlike orbit. And because it avoids
getting anywhere near Neptune, it never
comes closer than 12 astronomical units
that keeps it in a nice stable orbit
over a long period of time. And it's
called a QBano.
It's a classical kiper belt object not
in resonance with Neptune. So this was
characterized by what we now call 15760
Albian. but originally designated 1992
for its year of discovery QB1.
Hence, objects that are in similar
orbits to QB1 are called QBanos.
Sounds rather like something from Star
Wars, doesn't it? But that's an image
there of QB1 Albian.
And anything that shares this sort of
orbit is called a QBano.
Magnitude 19. So getting on the faint
side, this is the best image that the
Hubble Space Telescope can manage. Just
showing you how difficult it is. The
point is really that that light from the
sun spreads out over the surface of a
sphere. So it's diluted according to the
size of the area which is 4 pi r 2. So
it drops as the square of the distance.
And then that light hits the surface and
is reraiiated and reflected back to us.
And what we see coming back to us has
spread out over the surface of a sphere
from the reflecting object. So it drops
by another factor of R squared. So the
brightness of these objects drops
according to the fourth power of the
distance. Uh the same effect occurs with
radar, which is actually why primary
radar is really only used around
airports because it range is pretty
limited.
Physically, it's 10% the mass of Pluto
and about half the size. Um that would
make sense because a half times a half
times a half for the volume would add up
to an eighth doing that. And this is a
little bit less because we think it's a
little bit ellypoidal. uh a little bit
wider across 1286 kilometers than the
other two dimensions which are smaller.
You can see the numbers there. And as
with most objects at this distance to
the sun, pretty cold, 44 degrees above
absolute zero.
Rotating in 17 hours, 17.7. That's
actually slower than a lot of objects,
slower than things like Hame and some of
the other ellipsoidal objects that seem
to spin really quite rapidly. So this
was quite a surprise
and the reason may well be that its spin
rate is stabilized by the presence of a
moon
way the son of Ko in the mythology
170 km in diameter and orbiting round in
12 days. So
very interesting indeed to see just how
many of these Kiper belt objects have
companions and I think that's telling us
something that we really perhaps didn't
expect. Um we didn't find very many
asteroids in the asteroid belt to have
moons at all. And uh there was always a
question as to whether that was even
possible. I think the first was uh the
asteroid ID has a moon called Dactile
and that was the first to be discovered.
But uh it seems to be very common for
these koiper belt objects to have
companions.
Now the surface is dark. This one's as
dark as the surface of the moon. Only
12% of the light is coming back. But
detailed analysis of the spectra does
show that there is some crystalline
water ice on the surface again
suggesting a youthful young surface and
that it formed at a warm temperature. To
get the crystalline ice, it has to be at
least 110 Kelvin, not 44. And so this
was warmer water that created the
crystals. And it's probably from
eruptions from beneath cryo volcanism,
low temperature volcanoes. The spectra
also reveal ammonia hydrate and uh that
too is probably the product of these
geysers coming out of the surface.
We seems to be frozen methane and that's
common only on the larger kiper belt
objects. You need to have a decent
amount of gravity to hang on to very
volatile materials like methane,
nitrogen, and carbon monoxide at these
low temperatures because
the molecules are very lightweight. And
at the uh low temperatures, they manage
to be moving still at a reasonable
speed. And unless you're a very large
object with a decent amount of gravity,
they'll acquire escape velocity and just
vaporize off out into space.
Again, the dark color seems to show that
red coloration organic material and
tholins um perhaps less red than many
other Ker belt objects. Pluto is about
the reddest object that we know and
possibly not uniform in color with
differing regions. So it' be fantastic
to get up close. And another weird thing
about this is that it seems to be very
low in density, less less than one gram
per cubic centimeter. And we are finding
that with a few of these objects, less
than that of water. And the suggestion
is that even though it's made of
essentially ices, maybe some rock in the
very center, we don't know. Um, but it
may not be compacted. it may not have
enough gravity to get rid of all of the
voids and so it could be porous and
that's interesting too because it's uh
possible that there could be pockets of
liquid trapped in some of those voids.
Now it has rings. It's another of these
objects that appears to show rings
discovered as part of an occultation in
2023. So a recent discovery and these
rings are unusual in that they are
outside the rush limit. Now the rash
limit is the point
distance from the central object. If you
get closer than this limit then the
tidal gravity of the uh pull of uh the
mass will tear you to pieces. And uh
certainly if you're above a certain size
and so you can calculate where that
limit should be for large objects and
really anything inside the rash limit
should be torn to shreds.
But it's a bit curious that this is
outside the rush limit. So why is it
being torn to shreds out there?
It doesn't really make sense. And it
probably shouldn't be stable in that
orbit either considering the gravity of
the primary um and the the rest of the
environment.
So the origin of this ring probably
suggests that it's recent. So we have a
recent surface and an unstable ring in a
rather unusual position. And all of that
points to a collision. Now, collisions
in the koiper belt are thought to be
very rare. The models suggest that the
koiper belt is so sparse that collisions
between objects shouldn't really happen.
And perhaps the statistics are telling
us that there should only have been one
in the whole history of the kiper belt.
But I think if you listen to my other
videos about various Kiper belt objects,
you'll see that this is a pattern and
that maybe there have been in the past a
lot more collisions.
So it could be that the outward
spiraling motion of Neptune during the
early part of the solar system scattered
a lot of material further out and that
back in the day the Kiper belt was much
richer in objects leading to many more
collisions.
But that doesn't quite fit with the fact
that the surface is young. Maybe that's
entirely down to cryovalkcanism.
But if so, why is the interior still
warm? If the interior is warm, that can
only come from tidal effects or
radioactivity
or from the residual heat of the
collision. And the ring system, well,
that points to being collision debris.
Um, as indeed does the fact that there
is the small moon as well. So, it looks
to me like collisions in the Kiper belt
are common rather than rare.
More research needed, I think. And as
with the other Kiper Belt objects, once
New Horizons had completed its flybys,
it started pointing its long range
imager at known objects to get a
different angular view. This is an image
of uh the target here moving across the
field of views. a couple of galaxies in
the field of view and missions such as
the Chinese
uh space agency are talking about and
the so-called interstellar probe that is
being uh dreamt about sending a probe
out way beyond the solar system might as
well fly by some of these objects. So it
will be very interesting to choose these
as targets and learn a bit more about
these uh interesting objects in the
Kiper belts. And here just leave you
with this picture of the main body, the
two rings and the little moon out there
as well. So thanks very much for
listening.